[Music]
hey it's no big secret that volcanoes
can build new lands let's take the
Hawaiian Islands for example they were
the result of underwater volcanic
eruptions that pumped out molten rock it
reached the surface of the sea and form
land masses but did you know that the
earth isn't the only body in our solar
system with volcanoes with technological
advancements we were able to explore
from a farm parts of the universe and
discover volcanic activity on both
planets and moons granted some of them
have been inactive for millions of years
but others are spewing all sorts of
things into their atmospheres most
volcanic eruptions found on both moons
and planets formed millions of years ago
when our solar system was still a baby
and all cosmic bodies had higher
internal temperatures now when we think
of the term active volcano we usually
associate it with the ones on earth that
are currently erupting it's easy because
we can observe them closely beyond our
planet the luxury of studying volcanic
eruptions wasn't available until the
invention of powerful telescopes some
were even transported closer to other
planets and moments to get a better look
the most direct way to get evidence of
volcanic eruptions is to see or capture
them in action the other way is to
observe the body surfaces an outburst
can cover the ground with debris or it
can cause a resurface without such
studies it's almost impossible to know
if the volcanic activity is recent or
millions of years old volcanoes as we
know them are mostly mountainous
openings in the Earth's surface that
emit volcanic ash lava and gases
celestial bodies that are closer to the
Sun have a more solid composition and
produce silicate rock lavas just like
Earth
however planets and moons beyond Mars
are filled with gas and silicate rods
these have cryovolcanoes instead of hot
molten
they spew cold liquid of frozen gases
such as ammonia methane and water based
on studies only for bodies of our solar
system have been proven to have active
volcanoes and only one of them is a
planet the planet is our earth the rest
of them are moons we have Triton
Neptune's largest natural satellite
then there's Enceladus which is Saturn's
six largest moon and the most troubling
one IO which belongs to the Jupiter gang
it holds the title for the 4th largest
moon in our solar system let's start
with IO which recently made some news io
managed to scare everyone by making them
believe there was a black hole on
Jupiter NASA's Juno spacecraft snapped a
series of detailed images of the planet
back in 2012 during the latest approach
which took place this year it pictured a
huge black spot on the ringed planet at
first everyone was shocked but as it
turned out it was IO shadow being cast
on the surface the spacecraft was
approximately 5,000 miles away from the
planet surface but it just so happened
to capture an eclipse
due to iOS distance from the Sun it's
hard to imagine that it has active
volcanoes but because of its small
volume it's influenced by the planet's
gravity this gravitational attraction
causes powerful pulls which result in
strong internal tides these are followed
by inner friction the Moon heats up and
volcanic eruptions occur
io has hundreds of volcanic openings
some of them blast frozen vapor lava and
so called volcanic snow it was also hit
by asteroids just like other bodies in
our solar system but the impact craters
keep disappearing because of the
eruptions the volcanic material spills
onto the surface of the Moon hovering
and resurfacing different parts that's
the evidence of volcanic activity in
August of 2014 NASA showed some images
of volcanic eruptions that occurred on
IO between the 15 and 20
ninth of August in 2013 they were
gigantic eruptions projecting hundreds
of miles above the surface
oddly only Earth and IO can spew hot
lava in our solar system now let's get
to the King Triton this is the largest
natural satellite of Neptune
and the first place where cryovolcanoes
were observed in 1977 space probe
Voyager 2 detected a long cloud of smoke
filled with nitrogen gas and dust it
erupted from the moon and traveled five
miles up in the air these eruptions
happen quite often and Triton surface
became soft
here's how it goes the cryo volcano
eruptions fall back onto the surface
creating a soft layer similar to snow
researchers believe that radiation from
the Sun goes through the surface of the
Moon and heats up the underground layer
then heat gets trapped and vaporizes the
nitrogen that lies below the surface
that results in the expansion of
nitrogen which then erupts through the
icy layers the third active cryovolcano
is on Enceladus one of the natural
satellites of Saturn in fact this is the
best-documented active volcano the first
activity was recorded in 2005 by the
Cassini spacecraft it captured jets of
icy particles coming out of the South
Pole region Cassini even managed to fly
over the volcanic cloud and reported
that it was composed of water vapor
small amounts of methane nitrogen and
carbon dioxide there's a theory that
explains how those specific
cryovolcanoes worked below the satellite
surface there are pockets of pressurized
water it remains in liquid form because
it's warmed up from the interior
occasionally the pressurized water
comes to the surface and produces a
cloud of water vapor alongside ice
particles cryovolcanoes hadn't been
discovered until 2005 so an extensive
search in our solar system was limited
well not yet proven there's a lot of
evidence out there hinting at active
volcanoes elsewhere in the solar system
take Venus for example there's a lot of
action going on there it's the hottest
planet of the group it has over 1,600
large volcanoes and 100,000 to 1 million
smaller ones but what happens on Venus
stays on venus hidden below its thick
cloud cover which is mostly composed of
sulfuric acid and carbon dioxide well
that's a vacation spot there's no air or
water on the surface of the planet it
just boils off Venus has an extreme
greenhouse effect therefore its
temperature can soar up to 880 degrees
Fahrenheit
however it has many layers of different
temperatures the atmospheric pressure
slows down the winds this stops rain or
air streams from affecting its surface
which is why old volcanic eruptions look
relatively new the variety of explosions
is limited only lava comes out without
volcanic ash or explosive molten rock
the tallest feature that resembles a
volcano is the mod mods it's 3 miles in
height and orbiting probe called Venus
Express recorded some spikes and
temperatures that could indicate lava
flows however it hasn't been confirmed
if it's an active volcano in 2015
scientists working with NASA's new
Horizons mission collected
high-resolution data of one of two
cryovolcanoes on the surface of Pluto
they're 90 miles wide and two and a half
miles in height if scientists are
correct they'll be the largest
cryovolcanoes outside of our solar
system for the time being they were
given the name right Mons to honor the
Wright brothers another possible volcano
was mentioned in a 2019 study scientists
from the European Space Agency NASA and
the
Aerospace Center might have solved how
the ahuna Mons was formed this is a
mysterious mountain that appeared on the
surface of Ceres the largest object in
our asteroid belt it's believed to be a
cryovolcano that gushes plumes of
saltwater and mud onto its surface
Hanuman tada it means no worries I mean
no lava Mars also had a few volcanic
features in the Tharsis Monte's region
the largest one is the Olympus Mons the
mountain was formed because of repeated
volcanic eruptions on the planet this
was in fact the biggest volcano in our
solar system it stands 16 miles high and
is 374 miles in diameter to put that
into perspective if you were to put
Olympus Mons next to Mount Everest
well Everest would seem like a molehill
the gigantic Highland is a slightly
sloping shield volcano from the side it
represents a warrior shield laying on
the ground that's how the name was
inspired speaking of inactive volcanoes
mercury had a time it's now filled with
craters and as far as volcanic activity
goes nothing interesting happens but in
the distant past things were more
exciting there there were huge stretches
of land masses that formed as a result
of liquefied rock spreading across a
surface when the planet began to cool
down those volcanoes went extinct a huge
area of the earth's moon is also covered
in ancient lava flows but it's no longer
volcanically active those areas are
called mares which means seas in Latin
the somewhat darker looking areas remain
from previous magma streams that spread
on the surface before they cooled down
mayor tranquility the Sea of Tranquility
was where Apollo 11 first landed lastly
we have the largest moon of Saturn
it's the only identified moon with a
dense atmosphere it's also the only
extraterrestrial body with lakes but it
doesn't contain water it's made up of
liquid hydrocarbons one of the famous
mountains there is the doom mods however
there's still some debate as to whether
it has active volcanoes if it does
they'd be cryovolcanoes astronomers
suspect that more volcanic activity will
soon be discovered on the moons of icy
planets in our solar system
these include Europa Dione Miranda and
Ganymede they'll likely be so excited
with the discoveries they'll be over the
moon hey if you learn something new
today then give the video a like and
share it with a friend and here are some
other cool videos I think you'll enjoy
just click to the left or right and
remember stay on the bright side of life
[Music]